new install and setup page (#8415)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/install/auto.mdx

Reviewer: Note that since we're making this both an automatic and manual installation guide, we probably want to move this to be `en/install.mdx`, so our route is `en/install` instead of `en/install/auto` which would be misleading, since it's not about automatic installation anymore.

Author: Yes! My intention would be to do that with the big Sidebar Reorg PR. Here, I just wanted to get content separately, especially for translation. I was hoping that as little actual translated content will need to change in that PR.

I *could* instead rename this as a brand new file instead of replacing `auto` right now. It means that without a redirect yet, no one is *seeing* the new content. But, it will let the translators translate. Do you have a preference/suggestion?

---
title: Install Astro
description: A reference page in my new Starlight docs site.
---
import { Tabs, TabItem, FileTree, CardGrid, LinkCard, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';

The [`create astro` CLI command](#install-from-the-cli-wizard) is the fastest way to start a new Astro project from scratch. It will walk you through every step of setting up your new Astro project and allows you to choose from a few different official starter templates. 

> Or, you can begin your project [using any existing theme or starter template](#use-a-theme-or-starter-template).

Author: Just a note that we will often choose the shorter, simpler alternative words. These are more accessible for all readers, and are easier to translate! Sometimes a longer word "fits" or "sounds" better, but we do try to make the docs as easy to read as possible!

> To install manually instead, see our [step-by-step manual installation guide](#manual-setup).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To install Astro manually see our [step-by-step manual installation guide](#manual-setup).
```

Author: The "instead" is important here, but I do like including "Astro"! Thank you!

:::tip[Online previews]
Prefer to try Astro in your browser? Visit [astro.new](https://astro.new/) to browse our starter templates and spin up a new Astro project without ever leaving your browser.
:::

## Prerequisites

- **Node.js** - `v18.17.1` or `v20.3.0` or higher. ( `v19` is not supported.)
- **Text editor** - We recommend [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) with our [Official Astro extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=astro-build.astro-vscode).
- **Terminal** - Astro is accessed through its command-line interface (CLI).

## Start a new project 

### Install from the CLI wizard

<Steps>
1. Run the following command in your terminal to start our handy install wizard:

    <Tabs>
      <TabItem label="npm">
      ```shell
      # create a new project with npm
      npm create astro@latest
      ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="pnpm">
      ```shell
      # create a new project with pnpm
      pnpm create astro@latest
      ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="yarn">
      ```shell
      # create a new project with yarn
      yarn create astro
      ```
      </TabItem>
    </Tabs>

>     You can run `create astro` anywhere on your machine, so there's no need to create a new empty directory for your project before you begin. If you don't have an empty directory yet for your new project, the wizard will help create one for you automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    You can run `create astro` anywhere on your machine, so there's no need to create a new empty directory for your project before you begin. If you don't have an empty directory yet for your new project, the wizard will create one for you automatically.
```

Author: I'm thinking about this, and it actually does *help* you create one, or at least, it's not correct to say that it creates one automatically. You do need to give it a name in order for it to be created. So, I *think* the original should stand here, because I'm afraid that "automatically" might give a false impression that the user isn't involved.

Reviewer 2: You are right. I was not aware that it allowed the user to enter a full path. I thought it was just the name.

>     If all goes well, you will see a success message followed by some recommended next steps. `cd` into your new project directory to begin using Astro.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If all goes well, you will see a success message followed by some recommended next steps. Afterwards, `cd` into your new project directory to begin using Astro.
```

Author: Again, "Afterwards" isn't the language we would use here, but I admit it feels awkward to just jump into the sentence "verbing" the command like that. 

I will rewrite!

When viewing your site in the browser, you'll have access to the [Astro dev toolbar](/en/guides/dev-toolbar/). As you build, it will help you inspect your [islands](/en/concepts/islands/), spot accessibility issues, and more.

If you aren't able to open your project in the browser after starting the dev server, go back to the terminal where you ran the `dev` command and check the message displayed. It should tell you if an error occurred, or if your project is being served at a different URL than [http://localhost:4321/](http://localhost:4321/).

## Build and preview your site

To check the version of your site that will be created at build time, quit the dev server and run the appropriate build command for your package manager in your terminal:

    <Tabs>
      <TabItem label="npm">
      ```shell
      npm run build
      ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="pnpm">
      ```shell
      pnpm build
      ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="yarn">
      ```shell
      yarn run build
      ```
      </TabItem>
    </Tabs>

> Astro will build a deploy-ready version of your site in a separate folder (`dist/` by default) and you can watch its progress in the terminal. This will alert you to any build errors in your project before you deploy to production. If you opted to use Typescript, the `build` script will also check your project for type errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Astro will build a deploy-ready version of your site in a separate folder (`dist/` by default) and you can watch its progress in the terminal. This will alert you to any build errors in your project before you deploy it to production. If you opted to use Typescript, the `build` script will also check your project for type errors.
```

Author: I think the phrase people are more likely to hear in English is "deploy to production" (not "deploy it to production") although both are correct. In a case like this, we will often choose the phrase we think most people will use or say, so that if someone is new, they are encountering the phrase the way they will hear other people talk about it.

When the build is finished, run the appropriate `preview` command in your terminal and you can view the built version of your site locally in the same browser preview window.

> <ReadMore>Read more about [the Astro CLI](/reference/cli-reference/) and the terminal commands you will use as you build with Astro.</ReadMore>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<ReadMore>Read more about [the Astro CLI](/en/reference/cli-reference/) and the terminal commands you will use as you build with Astro.</ReadMore>
```

---
title: Install Astro
description: A reference page in my new Starlight docs site.
---
import { Tabs, TabItem, FileTree, CardGrid, LinkCard, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';

> The [`create astro` CLI command](#install-from-the-cli-wizard) is the fastest way to start a new Astro project from scratch. It will walk you through every step of setting up your new Astro project and allows you to choose from a few different official starter templates. 

Reviewer: Not 100% sure, but I suppose here would be `allow` instead?
```suggestion
The [`create astro` CLI command](#install-from-the-cli-wizard) is the fastest way to start a new Astro project from scratch. It will walk you through every step of setting up your new Astro project and allow you to choose from a few different official starter templates. 
```

Author: Oooh, interesting! I guess if it stems from "It will..." then it's "allow". If it's "It ... (will walk you through)" then it's "allows". 

Quick gut check says "allow" reads better, so let's go with that!

    First, install the Astro project dependencies inside your project.

    :::note[Important]
    Astro must be installed locally, not globally. Make sure you are *not* running `npm install -g astro` `pnpm add -g astro` or `yarn add global astro`.
    :::

    <Tabs>
      <TabItem label="npm">
      ```shell
      npm install astro
      ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="pnpm">
      ```shell
      pnpm add astro
      ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="yarn">
      ```shell
      yarn add astro
      ```
      </TabItem>
    </Tabs>

    Then, replace any placeholder "scripts" section of your `package.json` with the following:

    ```json title="package.json" del={2} ins={3-6}
      "scripts": {
        "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1",
        "dev": "astro dev",
        "start": "astro dev",
        "build": "astro build",
        "preview": "astro preview"
      },
    ```

    You'll use these scripts later in the guide to start Astro and run its different commands.

3. Create your first page

    In your text editor, create a new file in your directory at `src/pages/index.astro`. This will be your first Astro page in the project.

>     For this guide, copy-and-paste the following code snippet (including `---` dashes) into your new file:

Reviewer: not compound word nit
```suggestion
    For this guide, copy and paste the following code snippet (including `---` dashes) into your new file:
```

Author: omg that was NOT me, just copying from the old "manual" text. Thanks for catching that!

    ```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
    ---
    // Welcome to Astro! Everything between these triple-dash code fences
    // is your "component frontmatter". It never runs in the browser.
    console.log('This runs in your terminal, not the browser!');
    ---
    <!-- Below is your "component template." It's just HTML, but with
        some magic sprinkled in to help you build great templates. -->
    <html>
      <body>
        <h1>Hello, World!</h1>
      </body>
    </html>
    <style>
      h1 {
        color: orange;
      }
    </style>
    ```

4. Create your first static asset

    You will also want to create a `public/` directory to store your static assets. Astro will always include these assets in your final build, so you can safely reference them from inside your component templates.

    In your text editor, create a new file in your directory at `public/robots.txt`. `robots.txt` is a simple file that most sites will include to tell search bots like Google how to treat your site.

>     For this guide, copy-and-paste the following code snippet into your new file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For this guide, copy and paste the following code snippet into your new file:
```

    ```js title="astro.config.mjs"
    import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

    // https://astro.build/config
    export default defineConfig({});
    ```

    If you want to include [UI framework components](/en/guides/framework-components/) such as React, Svelte, etc. or use other tools such as Tailwind or Partytown in your project, here is where you will [manually import and configure integrations](/en/guides/integrations-guide/).

    Read Astro's [API configuration reference](/en/reference/configuration-reference/) for more information.

6. Add TypeScript support

    TypeScript is configured using `tsconfig.json`. Even if you don’t write TypeScript code, this file is important so that tools like Astro and VS Code know how to understand your project. Some features (like npm package imports) aren’t fully supported in the editor without a `tsconfig.json` file. 

    If you do intend to write TypeScript code, using Astro's `strict` or `strictest` template is recommended. You can view and compare the three template configurations at [astro/tsconfigs/](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/main/packages/astro/tsconfigs/).

>     Create `tsconfig.json` at the root of your project, and copy the code below into it. (You can use `base`, `strict` or `strictest` for your TypeScript template):

Reviewer: comma nit
```suggestion
    Create `tsconfig.json` at the root of your project, and copy the code below into it. (You can use `base`, `strict`, or `strictest` for your TypeScript template):
```

When viewing your site in the browser, you'll have access to the [Astro dev toolbar](/en/guides/dev-toolbar/). As you build, it will help you inspect your [islands](/en/concepts/islands/), spot accessibility issues, and more.

If you aren't able to open your project in the browser after starting the dev server, go back to the terminal where you ran the `dev` command and check the message displayed. It should tell you if an error occurred, or if your project is being served at a different URL than [http://localhost:4321/](http://localhost:4321/).

## Build and preview your site

To check the version of your site that will be created at build time, quit the dev server (<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>C</kbd>) and run the appropriate build command for your package manager in your terminal:

    <Tabs>
      <TabItem label="npm">
      ```shell
      npm run build
      ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="pnpm">
      ```shell
      pnpm build
      ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="yarn">
      ```shell
      yarn run build
      ```
      </TabItem>
    </Tabs>

> Astro will build a deploy-ready version of your site in a separate folder (`dist/` by default) and you can watch its progress in the terminal. This will alert you to any build errors in your project before you deploy to production. If you opted to use Typescript, the `build` script will also check your project for type errors.

Reviewer: my favorite type of nit
```suggestion
Astro will build a deploy-ready version of your site in a separate folder (`dist/` by default) and you can watch its progress in the terminal. This will alert you to any build errors in your project before you deploy to production. If you opted to use TypeScript, the `build` script will also check your project for type errors.
```

Also, here I think it's `opt`, not `opted`?
```suggestion
Astro will build a deploy-ready version of your site in a separate folder (`dist/` by default) and you can watch its progress in the terminal. This will alert you to any build errors in your project before you deploy to production. If you opt to use TypeScript, the `build` script will also check your project for type errors.
```

Author: Here, it's referring to "back when you ran `create astro`, if you opted..." so I *do* think the past tense is correct here. I'll add context/fix TS.

> Astro will build a deploy-ready version of your site in a separate folder (`dist/` by default) and you can watch its progress in the terminal. This will alert you to any build errors in your project before you deploy to production. If you opted to use TypeScript, the `build` script will also check your project for type errors.

Author: ```suggestion
Astro will build a deploy-ready version of your site in a separate folder (`dist/` by default) and you can watch its progress in the terminal. This will alert you to any build errors in your project before you deploy to production. If TypeScript is configured to `strict` or `strictest`, the `build` script will also check your project for type errors.
```

When the build is finished, run the appropriate `preview` command (e.g. `npm run preview`) in your terminal and you can view the built version of your site locally in the same browser preview window.

> Note that this previews your code as it existed when the build command was last run. This is meant to give you a preview of how your site will look when it is [deployed to the web](#deploy-your-new-site). Any later changes you make to your code after building will **not** be reflected while you are previewing your site until you run the build command again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this previews your code as it existed when the build command was last run. This is meant to give you a preview of how your site will look when it is [deployed to the web](#deploy-your-new-site). Any later changes you make to your code after building will **not** be reflected while you preview your site until you run the build command again.
```
